---
layout: post
title: "1-1.Computer Architecture"
date: 2025-10-14
categories: [reversing, basic]
tags: [dreamhack, Computer Architecture]
---

## 1. Computer Architecture
The field of study that examines how hardware components such as CPU, memory, and Input/Output devices are designed and interact with each other.   

---
## 2. ISA (Instruction Set Architecture)
A set of instructions that the CPU can understand and execute.   
### 1) CISC (Complex Instruction Set Architecture)
Designed with memory efficiency as the primary focus.   
It enables efficient use of limited memory by storing instructions more densely.   
### 2) RISC (Reduced Instruction Set Architecture)
The uniform instruction length enables fast CPU decodig.   
The smaller instruction set can lead to more complex programming.   

---
## 3. Von Neumann Architecture
### 1) CPU
Processes the program computations and manages the system.   
### 2) Memory
Stores data required for computer operations.   
### 3) Bus
A conduit for signal transmission between computer components or computers.   

---
## 4. N-bit Architecture
N-bit:   
    Unit of data that CPU can process at once.   
    Register Width: Bit-width of CPU register.   
    ALU Word Size: Data width processed by the ALU.   
    Address Bus Width: Determines the addressable memory space.   
    Bus BandWidth: Data transfer capacity between system components.   

---
## 5. x86-64 Architecture Register
### 1) General Purpose Register
**rax (Accumulator Register)**: Function return value.   
**rbx (Base Register)**: No primary purpose in x64.   
**rcx (Counter Register)**: Loop counter, Operation counter.   
**rdx (Data Register)**: No primary purpose in x64.   
**rsi (Source Index)**: Source pointer for data transfer.   
**rdi (Destination Index)**: Destination pointer for data transfer.   
**rsp (Stack Pointer)**: Stack pointer indication current stack position.   
**rbp (Stack Base Pointer)**: Base pointer indicating bottom of stack.   
### 2) Segment Register
**CS (Code Segment)**: Starting address of code to be executed.   
**DS (Data Segment)**: Starting address of the data segment designed be the program.   
**SS (Stack Segment)**: Starting address of the stack segment.   
**ES, FS, GS**: Used for general purpose.   
### 3) Insstruction Pointer Register
**rip**: Points to which part of the code that CPU should execute, 8-byte.   
### 4) Flag Register
Special register storing the state of operation results.   
Used for condition evaluation after operations (conditional jump, interrupts).   
**CF (Carry Flag)**: Set when the result of unsigned arithmetic exceeds the bit range.   
**ZF (Zero Flag)**: Set when the operation result is zero.   
**SF (Sign Flag)**: Set when the operation result is negative.   
**OF (Overflow Flag)**: Set when the result of unsigned arithmetic exceeds the bit range.   
### 5) Register Compability
| **Register 64-bit** | **Register Low 32-bit** | **Register Low 16-bit** | **Register High 8-bit** | **Register Low 4-bit** |
|---------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|------------------------|
| :RAX: | EAX | AX | AH | AL |
| RBX | EBX | BX | BH | BL |
| RCX | ECX | CX | CH | CL |
| RDX | EDX | DX | DH | DL |
| RSI | ESI | SI |  |  |
| RDI | EDI | DI |  |  |
| RSP | ESP | SP |  |  |
| RBP | EBP | BP |  |  |